Is there a meaning to this thing? Is there a meaning to life? What is the.
Meaning of life? I was brought up by a physicist, uh, and a physician.
They were more or less committed atheists who had left the church of Scotland
as a protest against sectarianism in Glasgow.
And so my sister and I were taught old from an early age life was a cosmic
accident. Uh, and that was it.
There was no great meaning to it. Uh,
and I, I can't really get past that. Isn't.
There a beauty to being an accident at a cosmic scale?
Yes. I wasn taught to, to feel negative about that. And if anything,
it was a frivolous,
a frivolous insight that the whole thing was a kind of joke. Um,
and,
and I think that atheism isn't really a basis for ordering a society,
but it's, it's been all right me.
I don't have a kind of sense of,
of a missing religious faith for me.
However,
there's clearly some embedded Christian ethics
in the way my parents lived.
And so we were kind of atheist Calvinists who
had kind of deposed God,
but carried on behaving as if we were members of the elect in,
in a moral universe. So that's kind of, um,
the state of mind that <laugh>, that I was left in. And I,
I think that
we aren't really around long enough to claim that our
individual lives have meaning,
but what Edman Burke said is true,
the real social contract is between the generations between the dead,
the living and the unborn and the meaning of life is for me, at least,
uh, to live in a way that honor the dead seeks to learn from their accumulated
wisdom, cuz they do still outnumber us. They outnumber the,
the living by quite a significant margin and then to be mindful of the unborn
and our, our responsibility to them.
Writing books is a way of communicating with the unborn.
It may or may not succeed and probably won't succeed.
If my books are never assigned by work professors in the future.
So what we have to do is more than just write books and record podcasts.
They there have to be institutions I'm 57.
Now I realized recently that succession planning had to be
the main focus of the next 20 years because there are things that
I really care about that I want future generations to have access
to. And so the meaning of life,
I do regard as being intergenerational transfer of wisdom,
ultimately the species will go extinct at some point,
even if we do colonize Mars,
one senses that physics will catch up with this particular organism,
but it's in the pretty far distant future.
And so the meaning of life is to make sure that for as long as there are human
beings,
they are able to live the kind of fulfilled lives
ethically fulfilled, intellectually fulfilled,
emotionally fulfilled lives that civilization has made possible.
It would be easy for us to revert to the uncivilized world.
There's a fantastic book that, uh,
that I'm going to misremember me losses, the captive soul,
the captive mind rather, um, which has a fantastic passage.
Uh, he was a,
a Polish intellectual who says Americans can never
imagine what it's like for civilization to be completely destroyed
as it was in Poland. At the end of, by the end of world war II,
to have no rule of law,
to have no security of even person nevermind property rights,
they can't imagine what that's like and what it will lead you to do.
<affirmative>. So one reason for teaching history is to remind the lucky,
uh, generation Z members of California, that,
that civilization's a thin film and it can be destroyed remarkably easily.
And to preserve civilization is a tremendous response that we have.
It's a huge responsibility and we must, we must not destroy ourselves,
whether it's in the name of,
of wo or the pursuit of the metaverse preserving civilization
and making it available, not just to our kids,
but to people will never know generations ahead. That's the meaning
and, and do so by studying the lessons of history, right?
Not only studying them, but then acting on them for me,
the biggest problem is how do we apply history more effectively?
It seems as if our institutions, including government are very,
very bad at applying history, lessons of history are learn poorly.
If at tall analogies are drawn crudely, often the wrong inferences are drawn.
One of the big intellectual challenges for me is how to make history more
useful. And this was the kind of thing that professors used to hate,
but really practically useful.
So that policy makers and citizens can think about the decisions that they
face with a more historically informed body of knowledge,
whether it's a pandemic, the challenge of climate change,
what to do about Taiwan. I can't think of a better set of,
uh, of things to know before you make decisions about those things. Then the,
the things that history has to.
Offer. Well, I love the discipline of applied history,
basically going to history and saying,
what are the key principles here that are
applicable to the problems of today, right? And how can we solve.
On that? The great philosopher of history, RJ calling said in his autobiography,
which was published in 1939,
that the purpose of history was to restitute past
thought from whatever surviving remnants there were and then
to juxtapose it with our own predicament.
And that's that juxtaposition of past experience with present experience that is
so important. We don't do that well. Uh, and indeed we've,
we've flipped it so that academic historians now think their mission is to
travel back to the past with the value system of 2021 and
castigate, uh, the,
the dead for their racism and sexism and transphobia and whatnot.
And that's exactly wrong.
Our mission is to go back and try to understand what it was like to live in the
18th century, not to go back and condescend the, the, the people of the past.
And once we've had a better understanding, once we've seen into their lives,
read their words,
try to restitute their experience to come back and understand our own.
I'm better. That's what we should really be doing.
But academic history's gone completely haywired.
And it does almost the exact opposite of what I think it should.
Do. And by studying history,
walk beautifully gracefully through this simulation,
as you described by mapping the lessons of history into the world of today.
We have virtual reality already in our head. We do not need Oculus.
In the metaverse. This was an incredible hopeful conversation in,
in many ways that did not expect.
I thought our conversation would be much more about history than about the
future. And it turned out to be the opposite.
Thank you so much for talking today. It's a huge honor to finally meet you,
to talk to you. Thank you for your valuable time.
Thank you, L and good luck with Putin.